---
title: "From Third World to First: The Singapore Story: 1965-2000 by Lee Kuan Yew"
index: 9
pages: 691
date: "2020-07-18"
reviewAvailable: true
---

**Opening words of my virtual bookshelf:** I have first encountered this book a couple of years ago while still in high school back in Kyrgyzstan. I was very much interested in it, but the task of reading seven hundred pages of pretty sophisticated literature seemed too ambitious back then. I did read very few books until my 20th birthday. Apparently, I haven't developed a habit of reading and enjoying books back in early childhood and even throughout all levels of school, all the way before college. To be precise, I have finished three of four books up until the summer of 2019. 

It was the middle of summer 2019 when I started enjoying books more than before. I like reading about business, technology, productivity, and political history. I started this virtual bookshelf to keep track of my reading/wish lists and potentially to reflect on some of my readings. It is a commitment in a way to keep myself engaged and in order to encourage to read more. I would love to come back and analyze how my reading habits and preferences have changed over the years. 

**This is the first notes and highlights of my virtual bookshelf. Hurray!**

**Overview:** First of all, I found this book to be extremely helpful to get a general understanding of relationships between the Britain, U.S, China, Soviet Union, and Southeast Asia back in a day. The book also provides great details about the early days of Singapore independance and major points in Singapore's relationship with the world. On top of everything already mentioned, of course the most exciting thing about this book was to read about Lee Kuan Yew and the way he governed and made important decisions during the many years in office. 

#### Getting the Basics Right

- Lee Kuan Yew describes Singapore's early days in a very specific way: "Singapore had no natural resources to exploit. All it had were hard-working people, good basic infrastructure, and a government that was determined to honest and competent. Our duty was to create a livelihood for 2 million Singaporeans."
- LKY points out his strategy to create a First World oasis in a Third World region: "If Singapore could establish First World standards in public and personal security, health, education, telecommunications, transportation, and services, it would become a base camp for entrepreneurs, engineers, managers, and other professionals who had business to do in the region." The book was written in 2000, so 20+ years later today we can see that most LKY's ambitious strategy was properly executed.
- "We had one simple guiding principle for survival, that Singapore had to be more rugged, better organized, and more efficient than others in the region. If we were only as good as our neighbors, there was no reason for business to be based here." This is a truly great mindset for such a small nation like Singapore in my opinion.
- The government played a key role in attracting foreign investments in order to bootstrap Singapore's economy. Things like equity participation in industries, fiscal incentives, and export promotion were there by default for all investors. But the government would go out of its way in order to attract big investors. There is a great example of Hewlett-Packard (HP) visiting Singapore for a potential invetment: "While HP negotiated to acquire a site for its own factory, it decided to lease the top two floors of a six-story building. The elevator to lift the heavy machinery needed a big transformer for electricity, but there was none in place in time for the visit of Mr. Hewlett himself. Rather than have him to walk up six flights of stairs, the EBD got a gigantic cable extended from a neighboring building , and on the day of visit the elevator worked. HP invested."
- This paragraph just blew my mind: "In the first decade from 1965, the new housing estates were sitted on the fringes of the central area, in Tiong Bahru, Queenstown, Toa Payoh, and MacPherson. After 1975, they were built further afield, in then rural or farming areas. Following my discussions with EDB officers, I asked the HDB to set aside land in these estates for clean industries which could then tap the large pool of young women and housewives whose children were already schooling. This proved successful when Philips built its first factory in 1971 in Toa Payoh. After this, most new towns had clean air-conditioned factories set up by MNCs producing computer peripherals and electronics–Hewlett-Packard, Compaq, Texas Instruments, Apple Computer, Motorola, and Siemens. They provided over **150,000 jobs** for more women than men, most living nearby; this helped to double or triple family incomes." It just sounds so simple and yet perfect, but this is a 30 years worth of effort compressed into a paragraph. 
- About retirement benefits/pensions: "A universal problem we had to resolve was retirement benefits or pensions when a worker became too old to work. In Europe and America, the government provided these pensions, paid for by taxpayers. **We decided that all workers should accumulate their own savings** in the CPF for old age. In 1978, we allowed the CPF to be used as a personal savings fund for investments. Early that year the government had revamped Singapore's bus services. We then formed the Singapore Bus Services (SBS), listed it on the stock exchange, and allowed members to use up to S$5,000 of their CPF to buy SBS shares on its first listing. I wanted it to have the widest share ownership so that profits would go back to the workers, the regular users of public transport. There would also be **less incentive to demand cheaper bus fares and government subsidies for public transport.**
- CPF growth: "The CPF grew from 420,000 members in 1965, to over 2.8 million members worth S$85 billion in 1998."
- Very good description of Singapore's situation back in the 1960s: "Malaysians had no love for us; the Indonesians wanted to destroy us. Politics was now no longer a game of mass rallies and demonstrations. It had become a matter of life and death. All Chinese know the saying: Big fish eat small fish, small fish eat shrimp. Singapore was a shrimp. People worried over their survival."
- Singapore was forunate enough to have strong foundations in education, which enabled a steady flow of young talent: under the British, Singapore had been the regional center for education, with good schools, training for teachers, King Edward VII Medical College, and Raffles College. Also Nanyang University."
- "Difficulties with our talent pool were aggravated when the rich Western countries changed their policies on Asian immigration. In the 1960s, when the Unites States was fighting the war in Vietnam, it did not want to be seen as anti-Asian. It decided to accept Asian immigrants, reversing more than a century of its whites-only policy. Canada, Australia, and New Zeland, the big countries with small populations, soon followed suit. They had long barred Asian immigration. When they changed their rules to admit better-qualified Asians, we lost a large part of the inflow of Chinese and Indians from Malaysia. Many middle-class professional Chinese and Indian Malaysians migrated permanently to the countries above. Fewer foreigners also came to Singapore for their education - there were other affordable options."
- Due to its diversified population Singapore had four official languages - Malay, Chinese (Mandarin), Tamil, and English. Later on English would become more like an "offical" language. 
- A note on keeping the government clean and reducing corruption: "A precondition for an honest government is that candidates must not need large sums of money to get elected, or it must trigger off the cycle of curruption. Having spent a lot to get elected, winners must recover their costs and also accumulate funds for the next election. Singapore has avoided the use of money to win elections."
- Lee Kuan Yew about greening Singapore: "Every time I return to Singapore after a few weeks' absence, and see the trees, palms, green grass, and free-flowering shrubs as I drive along East Coast Parkway from the airport into the city, my spirits rise. Greening is the most cost-effective project I have launched."
- About Singapore's ban on chewing gum: "A ban on chewing gum brought us much ridicule in America. As early as 1983, the ministed for national development had proposed that we ban it because of the problems caused by spent chewing gum inserted into keyholes and mailboxes and on elevator buttons. Spitting of chewing gum on floow s and common corridors inreased the cost of cleaning and damaged cleaning equipment. At first I thought a ban too drastic. Then vandals stuck chewing gum onto the sensors of the doors of our MRT trains and services were disrupted."
- About Singapore Airlines: "At a dinner in July 1972, with all union leaders and top management present, and before SIA was launched, I spelled out the need for a Singapore airline to be competitive and self-supporting; it would close down if it incurred losses. We could not afford to run an airline just to show the flag like outher countries did. By 1966 it had one of the largest and most modern Boeing and Airbus fleets in Asia, flying to nearly all continents. It was the most profitable airline in Asia, and for its size, one of the most profitable in the world."
