---
title: "The Founder's Dilemmas: Anticipating and avoiding the pitfalls that can sink a startup by Noam Wasserman"
index: 8
pages: 400
date: "2020-06-27"
reviewAvailable: true
---

This is a cookbook in a way - reading it only once might not be enough, it is better to keep it in your pocket and turn to it every time there is a question, chances are high that the book has an answer. Unfortunately for me, I have to return this book to Bennington's library, haha :) I will make sure to buy one, next time I want to read it. 

The Founder's Dilemmas provides a very detailed explanation of every step in startup's evolution: pre-founding and deciding to become a founder, building a founding team, splitting equity and compensation, deciding on roles and responsibilities, hiring beyound founding team, dealing with investors, and considering exit options. While the book is strongly backed by quantitative data on almost ten thousand founders, it provides stories of Evan Williams of Twitter and Tim Westergren of Pandora in great detail. 

This book shaped my overall understanding of startups and provided very clear answer to many of my questions. Time well spent. Thanks to Andrew Cencini who recommended this book during one of our conversations.

#### Founding Team Dilemmas

- **Who gest executive titles?**: Quantitative analyses suggest that three major factors are (a) each founder's level of commitment, (b) which founders are the *idea people* who had the original idea or developed the intellectual property on which the startup was founded, and (c) each founder's human, social, and financial capital.
- **Conflicts within founding teams:** Discussions that are contentious because of personal friction (also known as "affective conflict") tend to signal a lack of trust and can cause destructive tension and frustration within a team. Conflicts about ideas or about tasks (cognitive conflict), however, can often improve the team's decision making, intensify and enhance the relationships, and increase satisfaction. Specifically for the nonroutine tasks on which founders have to collaborate, such as setting strategy and resolving management issues, cognitive conflict is positively related to performance. 
- **A problem with multiple decision makers:** When more than one founder wants to be CEO, teams often try to avoid a confrontation by crowning multiple decision makers. This is a recipe for delay, lack of accountability, and ineffective decision making, especially as the startup grows. While ducking the original conflict may seem to have saved the startup from an early implosion, it actually causes longer-term conflict, endangering the startup's future. 
- **51% vs 50%:** Founders should realize, though, that even the "absolute control" granted by a 51% equity stake is not absolute and may not last. For one thing, a 51% equity stake does not guarantee direct control of all decisions. The most important decisions, such as sale of corporation's assets, are left to a vote of shareholders; here, the founder with a 51% share does have absolute control. But the next tier of important decisions is in the hands of the board, which is elected by the equity holders (who may also have seats themselves). As the number of directors increases, the equity stake necessary to elect a director decreases. Most importantly, the board elects the CEO, who controls the third tier of decisions, including oversight of day-to-day operations. 
- **Equity splits should be dynamic and adjustable according to any circusmtances:** Setting the early split in stone, without allowing for changes, is one of the biggest mistakes founders can make. Commitment of every founder might change over time, whether it is a family situation, health issues, or just a lack of motivation and interest. Equity splits should be updated accordingly. One very good example comes from pre-IPO Microsoft. While it was still a private company, cofounder Paul Allen was diagnosed with Hodgkin's lymphoma, which caused him to quit the company, leaving Bill Gates as the sole active founder during the crucial three years before it became a public company. They initially split the equity 64%-36% in Gates's favor; Gates's stake was 1.8 times that of Allen's. Even though Allen had been absent for the three crucial years before Microsoft went public, examination of Microsoft's S-1 prospectus shows that, at the time of Microsoft's IPO, Gates's equity stake was still 1.8 times that of Allen's stake (45%-25%). It is hard for the heart to bleed for Bill Gates, who despite having gotten the short end of the stick ended up becoming the world's richest man, but all founders should learn the importance of incorporating dynamic elements into equity splits.
- Dynamic equity agreements can make use of a number of approaches, such as buyout terms (in which a founder's stake might be bought on prenegotiated terms by the startup or by other founders) and vesting schedules. At their core, however, all of these structures are geared to deal with the uncertainties inherent in startups. 
- **About vesting:** Vesting is the most common type of dynamic equity agreement. It requires founders to earn their equity stakes, either over a specified time of when they accomplish specific milestones, rather than owning equity from the start. Founders who leave early or do not accomplish milestones, will have to return their equity stake either back to startup, replacing person, or other founders. Think of vesting as "golden handcuffs" that do not let founders to take equity stake without actually putting the effort. 


#### Beyond the Founding Team: Hires and Investors

- **A quote on family, friends, and money:** "If you go into business with money from friends and family, then you will either lose the business or lose your family, and have a very good chance of losing both."
- **Another quote from serial entrepreneur on family and money:** "Out of principle, I do not include familt in business/financial transactions or pursuits. The fact is, money stands to be the very thing that can dissolve the strongest of relationships. Added to the prospect of 'family drama' (of which everyone seems to have plenty), it's not worth it."
- **Founder-CEO succession:** A common reason to replace a CEO of a startup is underperfomance. However, the founder-CEO's very success at leading a fast-growing startup through product development is likely to accelerate his or her own obsolescence, and replacement. Quantitative data show that it is precisely at the point where startup has completed product development that the founder-CEO's chances of being replaces rise significantly. 
 
